---
title: Reflection
date: 2022-11-09T09:01:34.391Z
draft: false
---
I noticed this week that it’s been around a year since I last wrote here. The first thing that came to mind was, "How have I progressed as a software engineer since then?" One of my main concerns these days is the fear that I spend most of my time doing work that doesn't challenge or push me. Whether that fear is justified or not, I'll use this opportunity to step back and reflect upon the ways I've expanded specifically my technical abilities as an engineer. 

Since my last post, I knocked out several long-time tasks on my todo list. In the spring, I learned the basics of Elixir, the Phoenix framework, and Ecto, the latter of which I found elegant but not mind-blowing. Over the summer, I put Phoenix Channels to the test with benchmarks on a basic chat service. I also finally went through [Leslie Lamport's TLA+ video course](https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/video/videos.html), but have yet to make practical use of it in any scenario. And just over the last two weeks, I began writing a small amount of Rust. The Rust learning curve has been more like a wall than a curve, but the shocking amount of reading required to write a simple HTTP endpoint using [Actix Web](https://github.com/actix/actix-web)  actually excited more than discouraged me. Rust strikes me as a sophisticated language that has much to teach me, and I look forward to struggling with it some more.

Regarding languages I already had experience with: I started writing a little bit of Python again for work, but nowadays find that I don't like anything about it anymore. Thankfully, the majority of my time with computer languages was instead spent reading and writing JavaScript and TypeScript. Despite that, I don't think I learned anything new whatsoever about JavaScript. That suggests that I know more than enough about the language to do the kind of straightforward, everyday web development that is needed from me at my day job. However, I did learn a number of ways one can set up a TypeScript monorepo. Configuring a TypeScript project sort of reminds me of setting up Webpack back in the day; a lot of it is reading random guides on the internet, many of which slightly disagree with one another, and pattern matching onto a particular situation.

Outside of programming languages, I introduced myself to AWS CDK, which has served me very well as a way to quickly get a small number of AWS resources provisioned, and then destroy them all once I'm done. Admittedly, I've only worked with tiny CDK stacks featuring no more than 10 resources, and can't speak to its usefulness for larger projects.

And finally, I learned a decent amount about Redis. The Redis API is quite simple and was very easy for me to grasp. But I discovered that this means accomplishing more complex tasks using that API can get messy, fast. Overall, I love it as a tool, even though it made me think hard to make sure I was using it correctly. There was actually another database I spent much more time with over the past year, but I'll save my thoughts on it for later.